---
title: "DNSSEC Signing with an Offline KSK"
# abbrev: "Offline KSK"
category: info

docname: draft-mekking-dnsop-offlineksk-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Internet"
workgroup: DNSOP Working Group
keyword:
 - DNS
 - DNSSEC
venue:
  group: DNSOP
  type: Working Group
  mail: dnsop@ietf.org
  arch: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/dnsop/about/
  github: matje/offline-ksk-draft

author:
 -
    fullname: Matthijs Mekking
    organization: ISC
    email: matthijs@isc.org
 -
    fullname: Libor Peltan
    organization: CZ.NIC
    email: libor.peltan@nic.cz

normative:

informative:

  ICANN-KEYMGMT:
     author:
     -
         fullname: Jakob Schlyter
         organization: Kirei AB
         email: jakob@kirei.se
     -
         fullname: Richard Lamb
         organization: Internet Corporation For Assigned Names and Numbers
         email: richard.lamb@icann.org
     -
         fullname: Ramesh Balasubramanian
         organization: VeriSign, Inc.
         email: rbalasubramanian@verisign.com

     title: DNSSEC Key Management Implementation for the Root Zone (2010)
     target: https://www.iana.org/archive/root-dnssec-launch/files/draft-icann-dnssec-keymgmt-01.txt
     date: 2010-05-11

--- abstract

Offline KSK is a specific operational setup of DNSSEC zone signing, where the Zone Signing Key is present at the signer server and used for signing frequent zone updates, whereas the Key Signing Key is stored separately and used on special occasions when the apex DNSKEY records (are updated and) need to be signed.
This document outlines the basic operational routines and defines the textual format for exchanging data and metadata between both sides of Offline KSK setup.
The goal is that the format is not vendor-specific and different software can be used interchangebly at each side.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Domain Name System (DNS) is described in {{!RFC1034}} and {{!RFC1035}}.
The DNS Security extensions (DNSSEC) are described in {{!RFC9364}}.

When operating DNSSEC, one of the things to consider is how to generate and
store your keys. While the DNSSEC validation protocol does not distinguish
between different types of DNSKEYs, for operational reasons it is possible to
split the set of keys into Key Signing Keys (KSKs) and Zone Signing Keys (ZSKs).
In that case, KSKs are used for signing the apex DNSKEY records as well as CDS and CDNSKEY records if the are present, as required by {{!RFC8078}}.

{{?RFC6781}} argues that where keys are stored offline, the risk that keys can
be compromised through theft of loss is relatively low. However, storing keys
offline makes daily signing operations more complex. Separating the KSK and ZSK
functionality allows the risk to be managed for the KSK, while a readily
available ZSK can be used for automatic signing of the zone, and can be rolled
quickly without any parent interaction required.

Section {{procedural-steps}} gives practical guidelines how to operate the zone signer setup with responsibilities divided by OfflineKSK.
See {{ICANN-KEYMGMT}} for procedural steps of ICANN/IANA DNSSEC Key Management Implementation for the Root Zone.

Sections {{ksr}} and {{skr}} sefine the textual format for exchanging data and metadata between the ZSK Operator and KSK Operator and vice versa.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Terminology

Readers of this document should be familiar with the following terminology
from {{?RFC9499}}:
- DNSSEC Policy: A statement that "sets forth the security requirements and
  standards to be implemented for a DNSSEC-signed zone."
- Key Signing Key (KSK): DNSSEC keys that "only sign the apex DNSKEY RRset
  in a zone."
- Zone signing key (ZSK): "DNSSEC keys that can be used to sign all the
  RRsets in a zone that require signatures, other than the apex DNSKEY RRset."

Note that in practice, a KSK signs also other key related RRsets at the apex,
such as the CDS and CDNSKEY RRset.

Furthermore:
- Key Lifetime: The amount of time for which this a key is regarded as active.
- Signature Validity Period: The time a signature is valid, defined by the
  Signature Expiration and Inception fields in the RRSIG record.

Terminology that is used in {{ICANN-KEYMGMT}}:
- KSK Operator: The entity that manages the KSK in such a way that the key
  is stored offline. It is responsible for signing key related RRsets.
- ZSK Operator: The entity that manages the actual zone and ensures the
  zone is completely signed with the imported signatures from the KSK and
  signatures generated by the ZSK.
- Key Signing Request (KSR): a document containing one or more ZSKs that
  need to be signed by the KSK operator.
- Signed Key Response (SKR): document containing the RRsets from the SKR
  with signatures generated by one or more KSKs, for a given period of time.
- Offline KSK: A zone management practice where the private key of the KSK
  is stored in an offline environment, while the ZSK is managed by the same
  entity as the zone, so that zone data can be signed frequently and immenent.

ZSK-related DNSKEY: such DNSKEY record in zone apex that corresponds to a ZSK.

KSK-related DNSKEY: such DNSKEY record in zone apex that corresponds to a KSK.

OfflineKSK-related RRsets: DNSKEY, CDS and CDNSKEY RRsets in zone apex.

OfflineKSK-related RRSIGs: RRSIG records bearing signatures of OfflineKSK-related RRsets.

# Procedural steps {#procedural-steps}

Whenever some OfflineKSK-related RRset is modified or some OfflineKSK-related RRSIG needs to be refreshed, ZSK Operator and KSK Operator need to coordinate actions in a ceremony.
ZSK Operator prepares Key Signing Request (KSR), containing the set of current ZSK-related DNSKEYs, and hands it over to KSK Operator.
The KSK Operator completes the DNSKEY RRset with current KSK-related DNSKEYs, adds other OfflineKSK-related RRsets as needed, and signs all OfflineKSK-related RRsets with RRSIGs.
All aforementioned records are then put into Signed Key Response (SKR) and handed over back to ZSK Operator.
The ZSK Operator includes them in the signed version of the zone, together with OfflineKSK-unrelated RRsets and RRSIGs.

In order to avoid performing the ceremony upon each OfflineKSK-related RRset change (or RRSIG expiry), it is possible to pre-arrange all future changes to OfflineKSK-related RRsets and RRSIGs for some time interval in the future, and perform the ceremony in one go.
The KSR then contains the current set of ZSK-related DNSKEYs and for each planned change thereof, the timestamp of the change together with the new set.
The SKR contains the current set of OfflineKSK-related RRsets and RRSIGs, and for each planned change, the timestamp and the new set.
The future timestamps in SKR are a superset of those in KSR.

## Key Signing Request (KSR) {#ksr}

TODO: Desribe how to construct, validate, process.

Key Signing Request is a textual file, consisting of one or more Sections.
Each Section describes the complete set of ZSK-related DNSKEYs for a period of time:
the starting timestamp of the period is part of the secion metadata, the ending timestamp is the starting timestamp of next Section, or infinity.

Each Section is introduced by the line in the format ";; KeySigningRequest \<version\> \<timestamp\> \<suffix\>" as follows.
The \<version\> SHOULD be set to "1.0" and processing other versions is undefined yet.
The \<timestamp\> is the starting timestamp of the Section validity period, either in the format YYYYMMDDhhmmss (if it has 14 digits) or as UNIX epoch timestamp in seconds (less than 14 digits).
The \<suffix\> is an arbitrary comment with no defined meaning.

After the above defined first line, the section contains one or more DNSKEY records in zone file format.

After the last Section in the KSR, there is a concluding line in the format ";; KeySigningRequest \<version\> generated \<suffix\>" just to ensure the completeness of the KSR.

TODO: Format of KSR: header line, DNSKEY ZSK records (note: matching SEP bit
setting (to zero) is recommended but not mandated), mentioning that it MAY
contain other types of records from the zone (possibly even out of the apex?)
if the ZSK side is in control of them and wishes to sign them with KSK, but
the KSK side MAY ignore and discard them.

## Signed Key Response (SKR) {#skr}

TODO: Describe how to construct, validate, process, and activate.

TODO: Format of SKR: header line, DNSKEY ZSK + KSK records, CDS+CDNSKEY
records, other records, RRSIGs of all of the RRsets (MUST be present for
anything that appears there).

# Security Considerations {#security}

TODO (if any).

# IANA Considerations {#IANA}

This document has no IANA actions.

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO: acknowledgements.

# Appendix A: SKR and KSR format type
{:numbered="false"}

Why not JSON?

Because the metadata is so trivial that even JSON is an overkill
(unnecessary dependency) where fscanf is just fine.

Because the goal here is interoperability and when we already have this
format in use, defining a different (even if better) format would undermine
the compatibility.
